A computer system consists of hardware and systems software that work together
to run application programs. Specific implementations of systems
change over time, but the underlying concepts do not. All computer systems have
similar hardware and software components that perform similar functions. This
book is written for programmers who want to get better at their craft by understanding 
how these components work and how they affect the correctness and
performance of their programs

You are poised for an exciting journey. If you dedicate yourself to learning the
concepts in this book, then you will be on your way to becoming a rare “power programmer,” enlightened by an understanding of the underlying computer system
and its impact on your application programs.

You are going to learn practical skills such as how to avoid strange numerical
errors caused by the way that computers represent numbers. You will learn how
to optimize your C code by using clever tricks that exploit the designs of modern
processors and memory systems. You will learn how the compiler implements
procedure calls and how to use this knowledge to avoid the security holes from
buffer overflow vulnerabilities that plague network and Internet software. You will
learn how to recognize and avoid the nasty errors during linking that confound
the average programmer. You will learn how to write your own Unix shell, your
own dynamic storage allocation package, and even your own Web server. You will
learn the promises and pitfalls of concurrency, a topic of increasing importance as
multiple processor cores are integrated onto single chips.

In their classic text on the C programming language [61], Kernighan and
Ritchie introduce readers to C using the hello program shown in Figure 1.1.
Although hello is a very simple program, every major part of the system must
work in concert in order for it to run to completion. In a sense, the goal of this
book is to help you understand what happens and why when you run hello on
your system.


We begin our study of systems by tracing the lifetime of the hello program,
from the time it is created by a programmer, until it runs on a system, prints its
simple message, and terminates. As we follow the lifetime of the program, we will
briefly introduce the key concepts, terminology, and components that come into
play. Later chapters will expand on these ideas.


Our hello program begins life as a source program (or source file) that the
programmer creates with an editor and saves in a text file called hello.c. The
source program is a sequence of bits, each with a value of 0 or 1, organized in 8-bit
chunks called bytes. Each byte represents some text character in the program.


Most computer systems represent text characters using the ASCII standard
that represents each character with a unique byte-size integer value.1 For example,
Figure 1.2 shows the ASCII representation of the hello.c program.


The hello.c program is stored in a file as a sequence of bytes. Each byte has
an integer value that corresponds to some character. For example, the first byte
has the integer value 35, which corresponds to the character ‘#’. The second byte
has the integer value 105, which corresponds to the character ‘i’, and so on. Notice
that each text line is terminated by the invisible newline character ‘\n’, which is
represented by the integer value 10. Files such as hello.c that consist exclusively
of ASCII characters are known as text files. All other files are known as binary
files.


The representation of hello.c illustrates a fundamental idea: All information
in a system—including disk files, programs stored in memory, user data stored in
memory, and data transferred across a network—is represented as a bunch of bits.
The only thing that distinguishes different data objects is the context in which
we view them. For example, in different contexts, the same sequence of bytes
might represent an integer, floating-point number, character string, or machine
instruction.

As programmers, we need to understand machine representations of numbers
because they are not the same as integers and real numbers. They are finite
approximations that can behave in unexpected ways. This fundamental idea is
explored in detail in Chapter 2.