# 1.9 Important Themes

This concludes our initial whirlwind tour of systems. An important idea to take
away from this discussion is that a system is more than just hardware. It is a
collection of intertwined hardware and systems software that must cooperate in
order to achieve the ultimate goal of running application programs. The rest of
this book will fill in some details about the hardware and the software, and it will
show how, by knowing these details, you can write programs that are faster, more
reliable, and more secure.

To close out this chapter, we highlight several important concepts that cut
across all aspects of computer systems. We will discuss the importance of these
concepts at multiple places within the book.

## 1.9.1 Amdahl’s Law

Amdahl’s law describes a general principle for improving any process. In
addition to its application to speeding up computer systems, it can guide a company
trying to reduce the cost of manufacturing razor blades, or a student trying to
improve his or her grade point average. Perhaps it is most meaningful in the world
60 Chapter 1 A Tour of Computer Systems of computers, where we routinely improve performance by factors of 2 or more.
Such high factors can only be achieved by optimizing large parts of a system.

## 1.9.2 Concurrency and Parallelism

Throughout the history of digital computers, two demands have been constant
forces in driving improvements: we want them to do more, and we want them to
run faster. Both of these factors improve when the processor does more things at
once. We use the term concurrency to refer to the general concept of a system with
multiple, simultaneous activities, and the term parallelism to refer to the use of
concurrency to make a system run faster. Parallelism can be exploited at multiple
levels of abstraction in a computer system. We highlight three levels here, working
from the highest to the lowest level in the system hierarchy.

### Thread-Level Concurrency

Building on the process abstraction, we are able to devise systems where multiple
programs execute at the same time, leading to **concurrency**. With threads, we
can even have multiple control flows executing within a single process. Support
for concurrent execution has been found in computer systems since the advent
of time-sharing in the early 1960s. Traditionally, this concurrent execution was
only **simulated**, by having a single computer rapidly switch among its executing
processes, much as a juggler keeps multiple balls flying through the air. This form
of concurrency allows multiple users to interact with a system at the same time,
such as when many people want to get pages from a single Web server. It also
allows a single user to engage in multiple tasks concurrently, such as having a
Web browser in one window, a word processor in another, and streaming music
playing at the same time. Until recently, most actual computing was done by a
single processor, even if that processor had to switch among multiple tasks. This
configuration is known as a **uniprocessor system**.

When we construct a system consisting of multiple processors all under the
control of a single operating system kernel, we have a **multiprocessor system**.
Such systems have been available for large-scale computing since the 1980s, but
they have more recently become commonplace with the advent of **multi-core processors** 
and **hyperthreading**. Figure 1.16 shows a taxonomy of these different
processor types.

Multi-core processors have several CPUs (referred to as “cores”) integrated
onto a single integrated-circuit chip. Figure 1.17 illustrates the organization of a typical multi-core processor,
where the chip has four CPU cores, each with its own L1 and L2 caches, 
and with each L1 cache split into two parts—one to hold recently fetched instructions and one to hold data. 
The cores share higher levels of cache as well as the interface to main memory. 
Industry experts predict that they will be able to have dozens, and ultimately hundreds, of cores on a single chip.

Hyperthreading, sometimes called simultaneous multi-threading, is a technique that allows a single CPU to execute multiple flows of control. It involves having multiple copies of some of the CPU hardware, such as program counters and register files, while having only single copies of other parts of the hardware, such as the units that perform floating-point arithmetic. Whereas a conventional processor requires around 20,000 clock cycles to shift between different threads, a hyperthreaded processor decides which of its threads to execute on a cycle-bycycle basis. It enables the CPU to take better advantage of its processing resources. For example, if one thread must wait for some data to be loaded into a cache, the CPU can proceed with the execution of a different thread. As an example, the Intel Core i7 processor can have each core executing two threads, and so a four-core system can actually execute eight threads in parallel.

The use of multiprocessing can improve system performance in two ways.
First, it reduces the need to simulate concurrency when performing multiple tasks.
As mentioned, even a personal computer being used by a single person is expected
to perform many activities concurrently. Second, it can run a single application
program faster, but only if that program is expressed in terms of multiple threads
that can effectively execute in parallel. Thus, although the principles of concurrency have been formulated and studied for over 50 years, the advent of multi-core
and hyperthreaded systems has greatly increased the desire to find ways to write application programs that can exploit the thread-level parallelism available with the hardware. Chapter 12 will look much more deeply into concurrency and its use to provide a sharing of processing resources and to enable more parallelism
in program execution.


### Instruction-Level Parallelism

At a much lower level of abstraction, modern processors can execute multiple
instructions at one time, a property known as **instruction-level parallelism**. For
example, early microprocessors, such as the 1978-vintage Intel 8086, required
multiple (typically 3–10) clock cycles to execute a single instruction. More recent
processors can sustain execution rates of 2–4 instructions per clock cycle. Any
given instruction requires much longer from start to finish, perhaps 20 cycles or
more, but the processor uses a number of clever tricks to process as many as 100
instructions at a time. In Chapter 4, we will explore the use of **pipelining**, where the
actions required to execute an instruction are partitioned into different steps and
the processor hardware is organized as a series of stages, each performing one
of these steps. The stages can operate in parallel, working on different parts of
different instructions. We will see that a fairly simple hardware design can sustain
an execution rate close to 1 instruction per clock cycle.


Processors that can sustain execution rates faster than 1 instruction per cycle
are known as** superscalar processors**. Most modern processors support superscalar
operation. In Chapter 5, we will describe a high-level model of such processors.
We will see that application programmers can use this model to understand the
performance of their programs. They can then write programs such that the generated code achieves higher degrees of instruction-level parallelism and therefore
runs faster.

### Single-Instruction, Multiple-Data (SIMD) Parallelism

At the lowest level, many modern processors have special hardware that allows
a single instruction to cause multiple operations to be performed in parallel, a
mode known **assingle-instruction, multiple-data (SIMD)** parallelism. For example,
recent generations of Intel and AMD processors have instructions that can add 8
pairs of single-precision floating-point numbers (C data type float) in parallel.


These SIMD instructions are provided mostly to speed up applications that
process image, sound, and video data. Although some compilers attempt to automatically extract SIMD parallelism from C programs, a more reliable method is to
write programs using special vector data types supported in compilers such as gcc.
We describe this style of programming in Web Aside opt:simd, as a supplement to
the more general presentation on program optimization found in Chapter 5.

## 1.9.3 The Importance of Abstractions in Computer Systems

The use of abstractions is one of the most important concepts in computer science.
For example, one aspect of good programming practice is to formulate a simple
application program interface (API) for a set of functions that allow programmers
to use the code without having to delve into its inner workings. Different programing languages provide different forms and levels of support for abstraction, such
as Java class declarations and C function prototypes.

We have already been introduced to several of the abstractions seen in computer systems, as indicated in Figure 1.18. On the processor side, the instruction set
architecture provides an abstraction of the actual processor hardware. With this
abstraction, a machine-code program behaves as if it were executed on a processor that performs just one instruction at a time. The underlying hardware is far
more elaborate, executing multiple instructions in parallel, but always in a way
that is consistent with the simple, sequential model. By keeping the same execution model, different processor implementations can execute the same machine
code while offering a range of cost and performance.


On the operating system side, we have introduced three abstractions: files as
an abstraction of I/O devices, virtual memory as an abstraction of program memory, and processes as an abstraction of a running program. To these abstractions
we add a new one: the virtual machine, providing an abstraction of the entire
computer, including the operating system, the processor, and the programs. The
idea of a virtual machine was introduced by IBM in the 1960s, but it has become
more prominent recently as a way to manage computers that must be able to run
programs designed for multiple operating systems (such as Microsoft Windows,
Mac OS X, and Linux) or different versions of the same operating system.


We will return to these abstractions in subsequent sections of the book.