# 2.2 Integer Representations

In this section, we describe two different ways bits can be used to encode integers—one that can only represent nonnegative numbers, and one that can represent negative, zero, and positive numbers. We will see later that they are strongly related both in their mathematical properties and their machine-level implementations. We also investigate the effect of expanding or shrinking an encoded integer to fit a representation with a different length.

| Symbol                    | Type      | Meaning                         |
| ------------------------- | --------- | ------------------------------- |
| B2T<sub>w</sub>           | Function  | Binary to two’s complement      |
| B2U<sub>w</sub>           | Function  | Binary to unsigned              |
| U2B<sub>w</sub>           | Function  | Unsigned to binary              |
| U2T<sub>w</sub>           | Function  | Unsigned to two’s complement    |
| T2B<sub>w</sub>           | Function  | Two’s complement to binary      |
| T2U<sub>w</sub>           | Function  | Two’s complement to unsigned    |
| TMin<sub>w</sub>          | Constant  | Minimum two’s-complement value  |
| TMax<sub>w</sub>          | Constant  | Maximum two’s-complement value  |
| UMax<sub>w</sub>          | Constant  | Maximum unsigned value          |
| +<sup>t</sup><sub>w</sub> | Operation | Two’s-complement addition       |
| +<sup>u</sup><sub>w</sub> | Operation | Unsigned addition               |
| *<sup>t</sup><sub>w</sub> | Operation | Two’s-complement multiplication |
| *<sup>u</sup><sub>w</sub> | Operation | Unsigned multiplication         |
| -<sup>t</sup><sub>w</sub> | Operation | Two’s-complement negation       |
| -<sup>u</sup><sub>w</sub> | Operation | Unsigned negation               |

terminology will be introduced over the course of the presentation. The figure is
included here as a reference.

## 2.2.1 Integral Data Types

C supports a variety of integral data types—ones that represent finite ranges of
integers. These are shown in Figures 2.9 and 2.10, along with the ranges of values
they can have for “typical” 32- and 64-bit programs. Each type can specify a
size with keyword char, short, long, as well as an indication of whether the
represented numbers are all nonnegative (declared as unsigned), or possibly
negative (the default.) As we saw in Figure 2.3, the number of bytes allocated for
the different sizes varies according to whether the program is compilfed for 32 or
64 bits. Based on the byte allocations, the different sizes allow diferent ranges of
values to be represented. The only machine-dependent range indicated is for size
designator long. Most 64-bit programs use an 8-byte representation, giving a much
wider range of values than the 4-byte representation used with 32-bit programs.

The C standards define minimum ranges of values that each data type must
be able to represent. As shown in Figure 2.11, their ranges are the same or smaller
than the typical implementations shown in Figures 2.9 and 2.10. In particular,
with the exception of the fixed-size data types, we see that they require only a symmetric range of positive and negative numbers. We also see that data type int
could be implemented with 2-byte numbers, although this is mostly a throwback
to the days of 16-bit machines. We also see that size long can be implemented
with 4-byte numbers, and it typically is for 32-bit programs. The fixed-size data
types guarantee that the ranges of values will be exactly those given by the typical
numbers of Figure 2.9, including the asymmetry between negative and positive.

## 2.2.2 Unsigned Encodings

Let us consider an integer data type of w bits. We write a bit vector as either x, to
denote the entire vector, or as [x<sub>w−1</sub>, x<sub>w−2</sub>,...,x<sub>0</sub>] to denote the individual bits
within the vector. Treating x as a number written in binary notation, we obtain the
unsigned interpretation of x. In this encoding, each bit x<sub>i</sub> has value 0 or 1, with the
latter case indicating that value 2<sup>i</sup> should be included as part of the numeric value.
We can express this interpretation as a function B2U<sub>w</sub> (for “binary to unsigned,”
length w):


In this equation, the notation .
= means that the left-hand side is defined to be
equal to the right-hand side. The function B2Uw maps strings of zeros and ones
of length w to nonnegative integers. As examples, Figure 2.12 shows the mapping,
given by B2U, from bit vectors to integers for the following cases:

> `B2U4([0001])` = 0 . 2<sup>3</sup> + 0 . 2<sup>2</sup> + 0 . 2<sup>1</sup> + 1 . 2<sup>0</sup> = 0 + 0 + 0 + 1 = 1
> 
> `B2U4([0101])` = 0 . 2<sup>3</sup> + 1 . 2<sup>2</sup> + 0 . 2<sup>1</sup> + 1 . 2<sup>0</sup> = 0 + 4 + 0 + 1 = 5
> 
> `B2U4([1011])` = 1 . 2<sup>3</sup> + 0 . 2<sup>2</sup> + 1 . 2<sup>1</sup> + 1 . 2<sup>0</sup> = 8 + 0 + 2 + 1 = 11
> 
> `B2U4([1111])` = 1 . 2<sup>3</sup> + 1 . 2<sup>2</sup> + 1 . 2<sup>1</sup> + 1 . 2<sup>0</sup> = 8 + 4 + 2 + 1 = 15

In the figure, we represent each bit position i by a rightward-pointing blue bar of
length 2<sup>i</sup>. The numeric value associated with a bit vector then equals the sum of
the lengths of the bars for which the corresponding bit values are 1.

Let us consider the range of values that can be represented using w bits. The
least value is given by bit vector [00 ... 0] having integer value 0, and the greatest
value is given by bit vector [11 ... 1] having integer value UMax<sub>w</sub> = 2<sup>w</sup> − 1. Using the 4-bit case as an example, 
we have UMax<sub>4</sub> = B2U<sub>4</sub>([1111]) = 24 − 1= 15. Thus, the function B2Uw can be defined as a mapping B2U<sub>w</sub>:{0, 1}w →{0,..., UMaxw}.

The unsigned binary representation has the important property that every
number between 0 and 2<sup>w</sup> − 1has a unique encoding as a w-bit value. For example, there is only one representation of decimal value 11 as an unsigned 4-bit number—
namely, [1011]. We highlight this as a mathematical principle, which we first state
and then explain.

:::tip principle
Uniqueness of unsigned encoding: Function B2U<sub>w</sub> is a bijection.
:::

The mathematical term bijection refers to a function f that goes two ways:
it maps a value x to a value y where y = f (x), but it can also operate in reverse,
since for every y, there is a unique value x such that f (x) = y. This is given by
the inverse function f −1, where, for our example, x = f −1(y). The function B2U<sub>w</sub>
maps each bit vector of length w to a unique number between 0 and 2<sup>w</sup> − 1, and
it has an inverse, which we call U2B<sub>w</sub> (for “unsigned to binary”), that maps each
number in the range 0 to 2<sup>w</sup> − 1 to a unique pattern of w bits.

## 2.2.3 Two’s-Complement Encodings


For many applications, we wish to represent negative values as well. The most common computer representation of signed numbers is known as two’s-complement
form. This is defined by interpreting the most significant bit of the word to have
negative weight. We express this interpretation as a function B2T<sub>w</sub> (for “binary
to two’s complement” length w):

:::tip principle Definition of two’s-complement encoding
For vector x = [x<sub>w−1</sub>, x<sub>w−2</sub>,...,x0]:
:::

The most significant bit x<sub>w−1</sub> is also called the sign bit. Its “weight” is −2<sup>w−1</sup>,
the negation of its weight in an unsigned representation. When the sign bit is set
to 1, the represented value is negative, and when set to 0, the value is nonnegative.
As examples, Figure 2.13 shows the mapping, given by B2T, from bit vectors to
integers for the following cases:

> `B2T4([0001])` = −0 . 2<sup>3</sup> + 0 . 2<sup>2</sup> + 0 . 2<sup>1</sup> + 1 . 2<sup>0</sup> = 0 + 0 + 0 + 1 = 1
> 
> `B2T4([0101])` = −0 . 2<sup>3</sup> + 1 . 2<sup>2</sup> + 0 . 2<sup>1</sup> + 1 . 2<sup>0</sup> = 0 + 4 + 0 + 1 = 5
> 
> `B2T4([1011])` = −1 . 2<sup>3</sup> + 0 . 2<sup>2</sup> + 1 . 2<sup>1</sup> + 1 . 2<sup>0</sup> = −8 + 0 + 2 + 1 = −5
> 
> `B2T4([1111])` = −1 . 2<sup>3</sup> + 1 . 2<sup>2</sup> + 1 . 2<sup>1</sup> + 1 . 2<sup>0</sup> = −8 + 4 + 2 + 1 = −1

In the figure, we indicate that the sign bit has negative weight by showing it as
a leftward-pointing gray bar. The numeric value associated with a bit vector is
then given by the combination of the possible leftward-pointing gray bar and the
rightward-pointing blue bars.

We see that the bit patterns are identical for Figures 2.12 and 2.13 (as well as
for Equations 2.2 and 2.4), but the values differ when the most significant bit is 1,
since in one case it has weight +8, and in the other case it has weight −8.

Let us consider the range of values that can be represented as a w-bit two’scomplement number. The least representable value is given by bit vector [10 ... 0]
(set the bit with negative weight but clear all others), having integer value
TMin<sub>w−2</sub> = −2<sup>w−1</sup>. The greatest value is given by bit vector [01 ... 1] (clear the bit
with negative weight but set all others), having integer value TMax<sub>w</sub>=2<sup>w−1</sup> − 1. Using the 4-bit case as an example, 
we have TMin<sub>4</sub> = B2T<sub>4</sub>([1000]) = −2<sup>3</sup> = −8 and TMax4 = B2T4([0111]) = 2<sup>3</sup> -1 = 7.

:::tip principle
Uniqueness of signed encoding: Function B2T<sub>w</sub> is a bijection.
:::

We define function T2B<sub>w</sub> (for “two’s complement to binary”) to be the inverse
of B2T<sub>w</sub>. That is, for a number x, such that TMin<sub>w</sub> ≤ x ≤ TMax<sub>w</sub>, T2B<sub>w</sub>(x) is the (unique) w-bit pattern that encodes x.

Figure 2.14 shows the bit patterns and numeric values for several important
numbers for different word sizes. The first three give the ranges of representable
integers in terms of the values of UMaxw, TMinw, and TMaxw. We will refer
to these three special values often in the ensuing discussion. We will drop the
subscript w and refer to the values UMax, TMin, andTMax when w can be inferred
from context or is not central to the discussion.

A few points are worth highlighting about these numbers. First, as observed
in Figures 2.9 and 2.10, the two’s-complement range is asymmetric: |TMin| =
|TMax| + 1; that is, there is no positive counterpart to TMin. As we shall see, this
leads to some peculiar properties of two’s-complement arithmetic and can be the
source of subtle program bugs. This asymmetry arises because half the bit patterns
(those with the sign bit set to 1) represent negative numbers, while half (those
with the sign bit set to 0) represent nonnegative numbers. Since 0 is nonnegative,
this means that it can represent one less positive number than negative. Second,
the maximum unsigned value is just over twice the maximum two’s-complement
value: UMax = 2TMax + 1. All of the bit patterns that denote negative numbers in
two’s-complement notation become positive values in an unsigned representation.Figure 2.14 also shows the representations of constants −1 and 0. Note that −1
has the same bit representation as UMax—a string of all ones. Numeric value 0 is
represented as a string of all zeros in both representations.

The C standards do not require signed integers to be represented in two’scomplement form, but nearly all machines do so. Programmers who are concerned
with maximizing portability across all possible machines should not assume any
particular range of representable values, beyond the ranges indicated in Figure
2.11, nor should they assume any particular representation of signed numbers.
On the other hand, many programs are written assuming a two’s-complement
representation of signed numbers, and the “typical” ranges shown in Figures 2.9
and 2.10, and these programs are portable across a broad range of machines
and compilers. The file <limits.h> in the C library defines a set of constants delimiting the ranges of the different integer data types for the particular machine
on which the compiler is running. For example, it defines constants INT_MAX, INT_
MIN, and UINT_MAX describing the ranges of signed and unsigned integers. For a
two’s-complement machine in which data type int has w bits, these constants
correspond to the values of TMaxw, TMinw, and UMaxw.

The Java standard is quite specific about integer data type ranges and representations. It requires a two’s-complement representation with the exact ranges
shown for the 64-bit case (Figure 2.10). In Java, the single-byte data type is called
byte instead of char. These detailed requirements are intended to enable Java
programs to behave identically regardless of the machines or operating systems
running them.

When run on a big-endian machine, this code prints 30 39 and cf c7, indicating that x has hexadecimal representation 0x3039, while mx has hexadecimal representation 0xCFC7. Expanding these into binary, we get bit patterns
[0011000000111001] for x and [1100111111000111] for mx. As Figure 2.15 shows,
Equation 2.3 yields values 12,345 and −12,345 for these two bit patterns.

## 2.2.4 Conversions between Signed and Unsigned
C allows casting between different numeric data types. For example, suppose
variable x is declared as int and u as unsigned. The expression `(unsigned) x`
converts the value of x to an unsigned value, and `(int) u` converts the value of u
to a signed integer. What should be the effect of casting signed value to unsigned,
or vice versa? From a mathematical perspective, one can imagine several different
conventions. Clearly, we want to preserve any value that can be represented in
both forms. On the other hand, converting a negative value to unsigned might yield
zero. Converting an unsigned value that is too large to be represented in two’scomplement form might yield TMax. For most implementations of C, however,
the answer to this question is based on a bit-level perspective, rather than on a
numeric one.

For example, consider the following code:
```c
short int v = -12345;
unsigned short uv = (unsigned short) v;
printf("v = %d, uv = %u\n", v, uv);
```
When run on a two’s-complement machine, it generates the following output:`v = -12345, uv = 53191`

What we see here is that the effect of casting is to keep the bit values identical
but change how these bits are interpreted. We saw in Figure 2.15 that the 16-bit
two’s-complement representation of −12,345 is identical to the 16-bit unsigned
representation of 53,191. Casting from short to unsigned short changed the
numeric value, but not the bit representation. Similarly, consider the following code:

```c
unsigned u = 4294967295u; /* UMax */
int tu = (int) u;
printf("u = %u, tu = %d\n", u, tu);

```
When run on a two’s-complement machine, it generates the following output: `u = 4294967295, tu = -1`

We can see from Figure 2.14 that, for a 32-bit word size, the bit patterns representing 4,294,967,295 (UMax32) in unsigned form and −1 in two’s-complement form
are identical. In casting from unsigned to int, the underlying bit representation stays the same.

This is a general rule for how most C implementations handle conversions
between signed and unsigned numbers with the same word size—the numeric
values might change, but the bit patterns do not. Let us capture this idea in
a more mathematical form. We defined functions U2Bw and T2Bw that map
numbers to their bit representations in either unsigned or two’s-complement form.
That is, given an integer x in the range 0 ≤ x < UMaxw, the function U2Bw(x)
gives the unique w-bit unsigned representation of x. Similarly, when x is in the
range TMinw ≤ x ≤ TMaxw, the function T2Bw(x) gives the unique w-bit two’scomplement representation of x.

Now define the function T2Uw as T2Uw(x) = B2Uw(T2Bw(x)). This function
takes a number between TMinw and TMaxw and yields a number between 0 and
UMaxw, where the two numbers have identical bit representations, except that
the argument has a two’s-complement representation while the result is unsigned.
Similarly, for x between 0 and UMaxw, the function U2Tw, defined as U2Tw(x) = B2Tw(U2Bw(x)), yields the number having the same two’s-complement representation as the unsigned representation of x.

Pursuing our earlier examples, we see from Figure 2.15 that T2U16(−12,345) = 53,191, and that U2T16(53,191) = −12,345. That is, the 16-bit pattern written in
hexadecimal as 0xCFC7 is both the two’s-complement representation of −12,345 and the unsigned representation of 53,191. Note also that 12,345 + 53,191 = 65,536 = 2<sup>16</sup>. This property generalizes to a relationship between the two numeric values (two’s complement and unsigned) represented by a given bit pattern. Similarly, from Figure 2.14, we see that T2U32(−1) = 4,294,967,295, and U2T32(4,294,967,295) = −1. That is, UMax has the same bit representation in unsigned form as does−1 in two’s-complement form. We can also see the relationship between these two numbers: 1 + UMaxw = 2w.

We see, then, that function T2U describes the conversion of a two’scomplement number to its unsigned counterpart, while U2T converts in the opposite direction. These describe  the effect of casting between these data types in most C implementations.

:::tip principle: Conversion from two’s complement to unsigned
For x such that TMinw ≤ x ≤ TMaxw: T2U<sub>w</sub>(x) = x >=0 ? (x + 2<sup>w</sup>):(x)
:::
:::tip derivation: Conversion from two’s complement to unsigned
Comparing Equations 2.1 and 2.3, we can see that for bit pattern x, if we compute
the difference B2Uw(x) − B2Tw(x) , the weighted sums for bits from 0 to w − 2 will
cancel each other, leaving a value B2Uw(x) − B2Tw(x) = xw−1(2w−1 − −2w−1) =
xw−12w. This gives a relationship B2Uw(x) = B2Tw(x) + xw−12w. We therefore have:`B2Uw(T2Bw(x)) = T2Uw(x) = x + xw−12w`
:::

In a two’s-complement representation of x, bit xw−1 determines whether or not x
is negative, giving the two cases of Equation 2.5

As examples, Figure 2.16 compares how functions B2U and B2T assign values
to bit patterns for w = 4. For the two’s-complement case, the most significant bit
serves as the sign bit, which we diagram as a leftward-pointing gray bar. For the
unsigned case, this bit has positive weight, which we show as a rightward-pointing
black bar. In going from two’s complement to unsigned, the most significant bit
changes its weight from −8 to +8. As a consequence, the values that are negative in a two’s-complement representation increase by 2<sup>4</sup> = 16 with an unsigned
representation. Thus, −5 becomes +11, and −1 becomes +15.